[DX-1024, TT-11563] Updated mock response (#4074)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-tyk-oas.md

---

The [Mock Response]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-middleware" >}}) middleware allows you to configure Tyk to return a response for an API endpoint without requiring an upstream service. This can be useful when creating a new API or making a development API available to an external team.

When working with Tyk OAS APIs, this middleware is executed at the end of the request processing chain immediately prior to the upstream proxy stage. Thus, any other request processing middleware - including authentication - will be run before the request reaches the mock response.

The middleware is configured in the [Tyk OAS API Definition]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc#operation" >}}). You can do this via the Tyk Dashboard API or in the API Designer.

The Mock Response middleware has two modes of operation:
- in the [manual mode](#manually-configuring-the-middleware-in-the-tyk-oas-api-definition), you can directly configure a response within the middleware in the Tyk extension (`x-tyk-api-gateway`) within the API definition. Tyk will give this response to all valid requests to the endpoint

> - in the [automatic mode](#automatically-configuring-the-middleware-from-the-openapi-document), Tyk will parse the [examples and schema](product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-openapi) in the OpenAPI description and use this to generate responses automatically depending on the [content of the request](#working-with-multiple-mock-responses-for-an-endpoint)

Reviewer: The _examples and schema_ link needs to be a hugo reference rather than an external reference. This is what is causing of the htmltest CI errors:

```suggestion
- in the [automatic mode](#automatically-configuring-the-middleware-from-the-openapi-document), Tyk will parse the [examples and schema]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-openapi" >}}) in the OpenAPI description and use this to generate responses automatically depending on the [content of the request](#working-with-multiple-mock-responses-for-an-endpoint)
```

Select the **Tyk Classic mock response**

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-mock-added.png" alt="Mock Response middleware added to endpoint - select the configuration method you require" >}}

This takes you to the middleware configuration screen where you can:
- choose the HTTP status code that you want Tyk Gateway to return
- select the content type
- add a description for your mock response
- define headers to be provided with the response
- define the body that will be returned in the response (note that this must be defined as a JSON schema)

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-mock-manual.png" alt="Configuring the mock response" >}}

Select **UPDATE MIDDLEWARE** to apply the change to the middleware configuration.

##### Step 4: Save the API
Select **SAVE API** to apply the changes to your API.

### Automatic configuration

##### Step 1: Import OpenAPI Document containing sample responses or schema
Import your OpenAPI Document (from file, URL or by pasting the JSON into the text editor) configuring the **upstream URL** and **listen path**, and selecting **Auto-generate middleware to deliver mock responses**.

> <br>Selecting this option will cause Tyk Dashboard to check for sample responses or schema in the OpenAPI description and will automatically add the Mock Response middleware for any endpoints that have suitable data.

Author: ```suggestion

Selecting this option will cause Tyk Dashboard to check for sample responses or schema in the OpenAPI description and will automatically add the Mock Response middleware for any endpoints that have suitable data.
```

---

The [Mock Response]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-middleware" >}}) middleware allows you to configure Tyk to return a response for an API endpoint without requiring an upstream service. This can be useful when creating a new API or making a development API available to an external team.

When working with Tyk OAS APIs, this middleware is executed at the end of the request processing chain immediately prior to the upstream proxy stage. Thus, any other request processing middleware - including authentication - will be run before the request reaches the mock response.

The middleware is configured in the [Tyk OAS API Definition]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc#operation" >}}). You can do this via the Tyk Dashboard API or in the API Designer.

The Mock Response middleware has two modes of operation:
- in the [manual mode](#manually-configuring-the-middleware-in-the-tyk-oas-api-definition), you can directly configure a response within the middleware in the Tyk extension (`x-tyk-api-gateway`) within the API definition. Tyk will give this response to all valid requests to the endpoint

> - in the [automatic mode](#automatically-configuring-the-middleware-from-the-openapi-document), Tyk will parse the [examples and schema]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-openapi" >}}) in the OpenAPI description and use this to generate responses automatically depending on the [content of the request](#working-with-multiple-mock-responses-for-an-endpoint)

Author: ```suggestion
- with [automatic mode](#automatically-configuring-the-middleware-from-the-openapi-document), Tyk will parse the [examples and schema]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-openapi" >}}) in the OpenAPI description and use this to generate responses automatically depending on the [content of the request](#working-with-multiple-mock-responses-for-an-endpoint)
```

---
title: Using the Mock Response middleware with Tyk OAS APIs
date: 2024-01-31
description: "Using the Mock Response middleware with Tyk OAS APIs"
tags: ["mock response", "middleware", "per-endpoint", "Tyk OAS", "Tyk OAS API"]
---

The [Mock Response]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-middleware" >}}) middleware allows you to configure Tyk to return a response for an API endpoint without requiring an upstream service. This can be useful when creating a new API or making a development API available to an external team.

When working with Tyk OAS APIs, this middleware is executed at the end of the request processing chain immediately prior to the upstream proxy stage. Thus, any other request processing middleware - including authentication - will be run before the request reaches the mock response.

> The middleware is configured in the [Tyk OAS API Definition]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc#operation" >}}) either manually within the `.json` file or from the API Designer in the Tyk Dashboard.

Author: ```suggestion
The middleware is configured in the [Tyk OAS API Definition]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc#operation" >}}). You can do this via the Tyk Dashboard API or in the API Designer.
```

                "examples": {
                    "first-example": {
                        "value": "Jeff"
                    },
                    "second-example": {
                        "value": "Laurentiu"
                    }
                }
              }
            },
            "description": ""
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
In this extract, the API developer also indicates that a call to a`GET /get` could return `HTTP 200` but here provides two example body values `Jeff` and `Laurentiu`, again in plain text format. The `exampleNames` for these two values have been configured as `first-example` and `second-example`.

### `schema`
If there is no `example` or `examples` defined for an endpoint, Tyk will try to find a `schema` for the response. If there is a schema, it will be used to generate a mock response. Tyk can extract values from a referenced or nested schema objects when creating the mock response.

Response headers do not have standalone `example` or `examples` attributes, however they can have a `schema` - the Mock Response middleware will include these in the mock response if provided in the OpenAPI description.

> The schema properties may have an `example` field, in which case they will be used to build a mock response, however if there is no `example` value in the schema then default values are used to build a response as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The schema properties may have an `example` field, in which case they will be used to build a mock response. However, if there is no `example` value in the schema then default values are used to build a response as follows:
```

                                            "type": "string"
                                        },
                                        "id": {
                                            "type": "integer"
                                        }
                                    }
                                }
                            }
                        },
                        "description": ""
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
    "x-tyk-api-gateway": {
        "middleware": {
            "operations": {
                "getget": {
                    "mockResponse": {
                        "enabled": true,
                        "fromOASExamples": {
                            "enabled": true
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

This partial Tyk OAS API Definition would generate a mock response for calls to the `GET /get` endpoint from the schema defined in the OpenAPI description.

A call to this endpoint would return the following:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
X-Status: Foobar
Content-Type: application/json
 
{

>   "name": "Foo",

Reviewer: Would the order be the same as that defined in the schema: lastName, name, id?

Author: Apparently not

                "value": "/example-mock-response/",
                "strip": true
            }
        },
        "middleware": {
            "operations": {
                "anythingget": {
                    "mockResponse": {
                        "enabled": true,
                        "code": 200,
                        "body": "This is the mock response body",
                        "headers": [
                            {
                                "name": "X-Example-Header",
                                "value": "foobar"
                            }
                        ]
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

In this example the mock response middleware has been configured for HTTP `GET` requests to the `/anything` endpoint.

A call to `GET /anything` would return:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
X-Example-Header: foobar
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
 
This is the mock response body
```

The configuration above is a complete and valid Tyk OAS API Definition that you can import into Tyk to try out the mock response middleware.

## Automatically configuring the middleware from the OpenAPI Document

> You can direct Tyk to configure the Mock Response middleware automatically from the examples and schema [defined](#example-responses-in-openapi-specification) in the OpenAPI description by enabling the middleware for an endpoint and configuring the `fromOASExamples` object wiithin that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can direct Tyk to configure the Mock Response middleware automatically from the examples and schema [defined](#example-responses-in-openapi-specification) in the OpenAPI description. This is can be done by enabling the middleware for an endpoint and configuring the `fromOASExamples` object within that.
```

Date: Thu, 01 Feb 2024 12:31:50 GMT
Content-Length: 8
 
"Andrei"
```

If you add `"code":300` in the `fromOASExamples` object, a call to `GET /anything` will instead respond as follows:
```
HTTP/1.1 300 Multiple Choices
Content-Type: text/plain
X-Ratelimit-Limit: 0
X-Ratelimit-Remaining: 0
X-Ratelimit-Reset: 0
Date: Thu, 01 Feb 2024 12:35:45 GMT
Content-Length: 8
 
"Maciej"
```

{{< note success >}}
**Note**  

If multiple `examples` are defined in the OpenAPI description but no default `exampleName` is set in the middleware configuration `fromOASExamples` Tyk will select randomly from the multiple `examples`. Yes, that means the response may change with every request. You can [control which response](#working-with-multiple-mock-responses-for-an-endpoint) will be returned using special headers in the request.
{{< /note >}}

The configuration above is a complete and valid Tyk OAS API Definition that you can import into Tyk to try out the mock response middleware.

## Configuring the middleware in the API Designer
Adding a Mock Response to your API endpoints is easy when using the API Designer in the Tyk Dashboard, simply follow the steps taken in these short videos:

> 

Reviewer: remember to add the videos

Author: Adding screenshots instead for now

 < placeholder for "classic style" video >
 < placeholder for "openapi style" video >

## Working with multiple mock responses for an endpoint
The Mock Response middleware is enabled and configured in the Tyk OAS API definition to provide a default response to requests to an endpoint. Where the middleware is configured to return responses from the OpenAPI description within the API definition, you can configure the request to invoke a specific response, overriding the defaults configured in the middleware.

To invoke a non-default response from a mocked endpoint, you must add one or more special headers to the request:
- `Accept`: This standard HTTP header will override the response content type (e.g. `application/json`, `text/plain`)
- `X-Tyk-Accept-Example-Code`: This will select the HTTP response code for which to return the example response (e.g. `400`)

> - `X-Tyk-Accept-Example-Name`: This identified which example to select from an `examples` list

Author: ```suggestion
- `X-Tyk-Accept-Example-Name`: This identifies which example to select from an `examples` list
```

The middleware is configured in the [Tyk OAS API Definition]({{< ref "tyk-apis/tyk-gateway-api/oas/x-tyk-oas-doc#operation" >}}). You can do this via the Tyk Dashboard API or in the API Designer.

The Mock Response middleware has two modes of operation:

> - in the [manual mode](#manually-configuring-the-middleware-in-the-tyk-oas-api-definition), you can directly configure a response within the middleware in the Tyk extension (`x-tyk-api-gateway`) within the API definition. Tyk will give this response to all valid requests to the endpoint

Reviewer: for manual and automatic mode list items could maybe start as:

with [manual mode]...
with [advanced mode]...

> - in the [manual mode](#manually-configuring-the-middleware-in-the-tyk-oas-api-definition), you can directly configure a response within the middleware in the Tyk extension (`x-tyk-api-gateway`) within the API definition. Tyk will give this response to all valid requests to the endpoint

Author: ```suggestion
- with [manual mode](#manually-configuring-the-middleware-in-the-tyk-oas-api-definition), you can directly configure a response within the middleware in the Tyk extension (`x-tyk-api-gateway`) within the API definition. Tyk will give this response to all valid requests to the endpoint
```

> - in the [automatic mode](#automatically-configuring-the-middleware-from-the-openapi-document), Tyk will parse the [examples and schema](product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-openapi) in the OpenAPI description and use this to generate responses automatically depending on the [content of the request](#working-with-multiple-mock-responses-for-an-endpoint)

Author: ```suggestion
- with [automatic mode](#automatically-configuring-the-middleware-from-the-openapi-document), Tyk will parse the [examples and schema](product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-openapi) in the OpenAPI description and use this to generate responses automatically depending on the [content of the request](#working-with-multiple-mock-responses-for-an-endpoint)
```

If you're using the legacy Tyk Classic APIs, then check out the [Tyk Classic]({{< ref "product-stack/tyk-gateway/middleware/mock-response-tyk-classic" >}}) page.

## Manually configuring the middleware in the Tyk OAS API Definition

The design of the Tyk OAS API Definition takes advantage of the `operationID` defined in the OpenAPI Document that declares both the path and method for which the middleware should be added.

The mock response middleware (`mockResponse`) can be added to the `operations` section of the Tyk OAS Extension (`x-tyk-api-gateway`) in your Tyk OAS API Definition for the appropriate `operationId` (as configured in the `paths` section of your OpenAPI Document).

For basic operation, the `mockResponse` object has the following configuration:
- `enabled`: enable the middleware for the endpoint
- `code`: the HTTP status code to be provided with the response (this defaults to `200` if not set)
- `body`: the payload to be returned as the body of the response
- `headers`: the headers to inject with the response

For example:
``` json {hl_lines=["39-49"],linenos=true, linenostart=1}
{
    "components": {},
    "info": {

>         "title": "example-mock-response1",

Reviewer: why the change for for title, name and path in the example?

Author: Because there are three examples in this file and each can be copy-pasted into the user's Tyk deployment - that would be tricky if they all had the same name

This would return a plain text body and the `X-Status` header set to `false`.

The configuration above is a complete and valid Tyk OAS API Definition that you can import into Tyk to try out the mock response middleware.

## Configuring the middleware in the API Designer

Adding a mock response to your API endpoints is easy when using the API Designer in the Tyk Dashboard, simply follow the steps appropriate to the configuration method you wish to use:
 - [manual configuration](#manual-configuration) of the middleware config
 - [automatic configuration](#automatic-configuration) from the OpenAPI description

> ### Manual configuration

Reviewer: Add anchor links here and also for automatic configuration section. For example:

```suggestion
### Manual configuration {#manual}
```

Author: Why does this need a link? It's already a heading - so can be linked to AFAIK

##### Step 1: Add an endpoint for the path
From the **API Designer** add an endpoint that matches the path you want to rewrite.

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-no-endpoints.png" alt="Tyk OAS API Designer showing no endpoints created" >}}

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-add-endpoint.png" alt="Adding an endpoint to an API using the Tyk OAS API Designer" >}}

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-no-middleware.png" alt="Tyk OAS API Designer showing no middleware enabled on endpoint" >}}

##### Step 2: Select the Mock Response middleware

> Select **ADD MIDDLEWARE** and choose the **Mock Response** middleware from the *Add Middleware* screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select **ADD MIDDLEWARE** and choose **Mock Response** middleware from the *Add Middleware* screen.
``

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-mock.png" alt="Adding the Mock Response middleware" >}}

##### Step 3: Configure the Tyk Classic mock response

> Select the **Tyk Classic mock response**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select **Tyk Classic mock response**
```

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-mock-added.png" alt="Mock Response middleware added to endpoint - select the configuration method you require" >}}

This takes you to the middleware configuration screen where you can:
- choose the HTTP status code that you want Tyk Gateway to return
- select the content type
- add a description for your mock response
- define headers to be provided with the response
- define the body that will be returned in the response (note that this must be defined as a JSON schema)

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-mock-manual.png" alt="Configuring the mock response" >}}

Select **UPDATE MIDDLEWARE** to apply the change to the middleware configuration.

##### Step 4: Save the API
Select **SAVE API** to apply the changes to your API.

### Automatic configuration

##### Step 1: Import OpenAPI Document containing sample responses or schema
Import your OpenAPI Document (from file, URL or by pasting the JSON into the text editor) configuring the **upstream URL** and **listen path**, and selecting **Auto-generate middleware to deliver mock responses**.

> <br>Selecting this option will cause Tyk Dashboard to check for sample responses or schema in the OpenAPI description and will automatically add the Mock Response middleware for any endpoints that have suitable data.

Reviewer: Remove br tag and insert newline between paragraphs

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-mock-auto-edit.png" alt="Editing the Mock Response middleware" >}}

##### Step 3: Configure the mock response
Tyk Dashboard will automatically have selected a valid HTTP response code from the drop-down. When you select a valid content-type for which a mock response is configured in the OpenAPI specification, the API Designer will display the associated response.

{{< img src="/img/dashboard/api-designer/tyk-oas-mock-auto-select.png" alt="Mock Response middleware automatically configured from OpenAPI description" >}}

Here you can edit the mock response:
- modify, add or delete Response Body examples (note that this must follow the selected content-type)
- choose a default Response Body example that will be provided (unless [overridden in the request]({{< ref "#working-with-multiple-mock-responses-for-an-endpoint" >}}))
- add a description for your mock response
- define headers to be provided with the response (note that these must be defined as a JSON schema)
- add a schema

> You can create and edit mock responses for multiple HTTP status codes by choosing a different state code from the drop down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create and edit mock responses for multiple HTTP status codes by choosing a different status code from the drop down.
```
